It's the 11th of September 2022. My name is Sarah Rixon and I'm here at Flanders
Dove Wells Hospital to interview James Walters. Hello James, thank you so much
for your time today. Oh you're very welcome. Just to just to kick off, can you
tell me a little bit about yourself, your background including your place and date
Right, the 8th of June 1940. I was actually born in a cottage hospital of a place
called Latterworth south of Leicester but that was because my father was the
vicar of a little village between those two places called Dunton
Bassett and the thing about that was, bless him, he was pretty much in a
wheelchair from day one as far as I was concerned because very remarkably he'd
been diagnosed with MS when he was at school just before the First World War
finished which is why he never made it into that particular thing. Anyway there
he was and unfortunately he actually was totally bedbound in a Bosworth
cottage hospital with Richard III or whichever one was found in the Carle Park
after about 1947 I would say so and he died when I was 1948 so that was how
much I knew of him except that by all accounts he was the most wonderfully
generous minded person in the world who would announce to the rest of the family
were older than me. I had three sisters and they were all older than me and they
assured me that he would seize the newspaper and say well now children this
is a wonderful product here which is so wonderful I think we should get some and
they said daddy you know what you that is you've just read out no dear what's
that what's that it's an advertisement daddy yes but I'm sure they sound very
respectful they wouldn't say it was as good if they didn't mean it so there we
had there was the man if I'd half as good as him I think it would be alright
anyway so that was that and then of course I was but I was bundled off to a
boarding school that's the first school I'd gone to and it's probably the only
other time I've been sent away from where I lived other than now and indeed
that was with a certain amount of advanced boarding even and a little bit
of an idea not much as to what it was I was told well basically it was something
that you had to do and I'll tell you what you didn't have a phone so you
couldn't send phone pictures and messages to all your loved ones and until
for about another 60 years and now is just so wonderful because everybody is
sending me pictures of everybody all the time and I tell you if you didn't think
it would make a difference you're wrong it does keep sending the photographs is
anyway there we go and then the thing was I've never been able to decide what
I wanted to do like people now quite rightly even if they've got just
graduated they're not necessarily sure they want to go through the university
I mean for quite different reasons at that stage I didn't have my heart in it
at all so in fact you've got to do something with something I mean in order
to get by and doing something so that's what you do until that has to change and
the first thing was that some fortunately I'd been at school with
someone who knew exactly what he was going to do he was going to go to Barts
and change the doctor and he knew that I lived in out of London at that stage so
he hooked me into his circle of student friends and half a dozen of those are my
current longest-standing friends so I kind of did things sort of which related
to that well actually the first one was a was an earlier school friend who left
the year before me and gone to Canada and he was spending his second year in
Heidelberg in Germany and he came through just as I was leaving and so I
went to Heidelberg with him for a year and that was then very clear that really
I was going to be I was going to be Beethoven again which was alright but
what it meant was I couldn't sort of fool around I had to make a decent start I
came back to London with the idea of I think I did apply to Royal College of
Music but they were very kind and said do you know what so I started teaching
myself I thought you know with medieval and I went to live there in 1972 doing
my crochet thing and I mean quite soon after that I would much more interested
me to develop ways of crocheting which involved not having these damn patterns
which are mind-blowingly boring and only there so that one lot of people can
control another lot of people who've got no self-confidence in their ability to
create you know so I wanted that's why I saw called new because it's not old
crochet new crochet you see and because of the times and the season and
everything else and publishers and everything else found myself doing a
the book or books in other words look if you want to do this don't worry about
all that you know do it start itself the good news is you don't have to
unpick anything you do because if you don't like it that way it might be
better that way you know let's do it and so the book came out and various things
and at the same time they were starting this summer school in Morecambe and so
they wanted to make it about all of that and Sylvia who was doing her own
little business in Soho doing the trimmings trade and doing with a
particular interest in crochet and so on and so forth was told about all this and
joined the thing as a student and so I was just on the point of
deciding I don't really like this kind of life where you've got to keep going
to places and talking to rooms full of people in a jolly manner I was just
about to think I'm going to tell this off but the publisher of the book said
the series of three three magazines they wanted to do one after the other they
wanted to not do it like that I wanted to push them all into a hardback right
away so they'd probably gonna have to find someone to work with me and I
thought oh hell if I can get Sylvia because she's very infestive from day
one you know I thought if I get her to be the one we'll be able to tell them
don't worry it's all done which is what happened and they did so we started
working on you know how to do this well in fact we had to go on doing all the
gigs around the country because you you've got to do that if you're gonna
anyone's gonna notice anything you do but it wasn't so bad doing it with
somebody else you know what I mean yes the Sony reason it didn't stop there in
many ways so anyway that that kind of sort of that sort of went on and the
other people in that photograph other the marketing manager of Patons and
Baldwin's and the director of the knitting craft group as was and so they
all started asking us to do stuff as well for them and then so we moved on
you know through the 80s and eventually by the sort of 90s we would go knitting
and crazy good with America and the place outside Chicago you know we're
asking us over and we went to Vermont at one point for another group of people
in America and then also New Zealand and Australia the big taffeta Australian
thing for textile art and we were doing all those those kind of things and
coming up to the fact that suddenly in about 1990 five or six ish the family
whose cottage I've been staying I mean I've been I have been paying them rent
but not a lot you know it's all very personal they had always said when we
want that back you know you've got to understand we need it back so I saw it
wasn't anything to do with legal nonsense so I'm looking for some way
well round about here is a big black hole probably still is price-wise yeah
so we got here before we found anything very attractive on the cost front and
also on the on the visuals front and so we started looking well the thing about
this chapel was it has what we call the cottage which is not self-contained in
that you have to go through as you would just to get into the chapel itself
and go up the stairs to get to it but then internally there's the door to it
and it's it's a bedroom with at least two if not three spaces for beds and
there's a self-contained loo and a wash basin and a bath with a sit-down sort of
spray and shower nozzle I don't go in there except to check whether the jack
doors are screwing up the chimney that's Barry and and Sylvia's own thing and
they put in half the money for it and we co-own the whole thing on this half
basis and they know they don't have to think which is the same point with these
carers they don't have to think whether they're like like everybody who comes to
visit me in a felicity doing all that they have to think where they're going
to stay and what they get it's a nightmare this was not going to apply to
because Barry was retiring anyway he was born in Cardiff and hadn't been back
there for 50 years he wants to kind of explore his Welsh roots and Sylvia
wanted to get all the stuff a lot of which have been hoarded unviewable and
in Raglan because it was tiny and put it all somewhere we could look at it and
have a sabbatical look at what we were going to do with all of that moving on
for the rest of our lives
So just to recap then, the old chapel in Durnall provided a great base for you and Sylvia and Barry
not only in terms of living accommodation but also a place to store and show your crochet
All that stuff you see was all going to come together and I mean you'd find it
quite hard to find a more appropriate property to do that with and so we got
on with it well on the day that we were moving in which was September the 1st
Sylvia was doing the stairs the brush side I'm not really feeling very well
and she went to her GP by about sort of October or November and they said well
yes you won't be feeling very well because you're riddled with cancer
everywhere and so she died the following July the 31st and so our entire
existence is out the window on day one well that is massive and neither of us
had any idea what to do about any of it and if we had had we wouldn't have done it
I mean you know it totally wiped us both out but so one of the reasons for that
one of the things there was we didn't move a muscle for a long while by which
time I had to think I can't do this well no I didn't even think that I thought
with the stoic soul I would be able to get back into things after a year or so
and on that basis I didn't cancel the gig we'd agreed to do for 2003
back in 1990 whatever it was when we did the last one in Australia so I kept
that in the in the diary as it were and I had to do it and it only turned out to
be exactly what we'd been struggling to avoid having to do is it repeat what
we've done with the same kit which I hadn't even dismounted out of the bags
we taped it in the first time so I did that but apart from that crochet was
over because it had been a thing I did with her that was it and it had stopped
anyway because we were going to do something else we don't know what not
else but sort of moving on as it were and so I stopped so then I've got to
find something else to do to turn the living without having to go out the door or
actually speak to anybody much and that turned out to be the website thing which
for various reasons is always help from other people who could put bits of work
in my way I was able to do and a pretty kind of low level really so so you took
the decision to stay internal yeah another way to generate an income and
it was it was through the website can you tell me a little bit about the
website yes well the thing was for our own purposes we had to learn how to do
websites because we needed them for ourselves and so to that extent I'd
already was into doing it so I could say to people at least you know here's a
website I've done and at the same time another friend of mine needed a website
done for his own purposes which he didn't want to pay much for so I mean it
worked both ends you know he he wanted the website and he he knew me well
enough to sort of trust me to understand what his position was so we
winkled and did that so the kind of thing built up until I went free for
about I don't know ten years maybe I don't know maybe not quite ten years I
was doing quite a significant website and that then turned into see all these
people at that stage back in the day they all had people in this kind of
situation where they needed to sort of get themselves into having websites but
they were terrified about it and didn't really want to pay very much that suited
me very well I you know I could do things for those people so I eat and of
course I in due course my actual retirement age kicked in so I get it I
you know I've had a pension since whenever that was so you know I've
managed to eat enough to just to sort of eat the thing and then suddenly in 20
whenever it was and this is this this is this is an important thing from my
point of view but also it's a ship that's sailed and that's Peter who used
to live up the lane the other side of Kari Gawula who got me into walking at
all by just being the person who knows how to not say too much or too little
and how much I'd benefit if I just thought to take a little walk here and
there and it took him a year and something and it's the most wonderful
thing to have done for anybody to have nerdled me out there and I got
subsequently you see we spend a lot of time not only walking all these hills
together because Becky and Harry didn't get involved he did the same with them
you see it'll happen when it'll happen he's brilliant at that and it did
happen and we all got huge amount out of it but even when I and we've talked
about all these things which is what you do if you find yourself walking the
hills with all these people
So just to recap again Peter was the chap locally who introduced you to walking in the area
with Becky and Harry who'd be around the corner. So tell me a little bit about some of the walks that you've done.
Well, well the main anniversary walk is to go and strain up our valley right up
usually going up past the cops and going up right over the top.
So this is the Dernal Valley?
Yeah and it's where the Dernal Valley or the Y Valley walk really ought to go rather than up the lane adjacent to the stream
but there are all kinds of good reasons why that's the case so I'm not arguing and probably the owners are quite glad it doesn't go there
it's only us that go that way and you get right up to the Cairn the other side of the forest which turns out to be part of a group of what Cadu described
as almost certainly the most exciting unexplored Bronze Age sites in Europe and nobody except in 1902 or something when there were some
archaeologists emerging from London with a view to doing that and the people in Llangurie and Clochfine said well maybe but only over our dead bodies
on account of anybody who does that it's going to bring a million years of eternal damnation all over that area and we'd suggest your next move would be back to London.
So James this is the Cairn at the top of the Traffle Gwyn forest?
Yeah that's one of them it's sort of one of the corners and then going on round that way over down looking at town well the whole old Rovers Road thing all the way to
the what's the next stream that goes down to the left to anyway it's quite tricky a lot of it the ground is quite a lot of tricky that way so you know we've only been there a few times
but we lust over well some of us don't anymore it's beyond us but no the first one is the Cairn that's our Cairn and it's where you know all you red hot wild campers
and it's wonderful when you photograph that because you're photographing the thing itself you're photographing each other and you're photographing the entire landscape up there which everybody up until the end of the stagecoach age where that was your only way of getting to Ristwith and so on
they all hated it because that's where that's where all the bandits would lurk and they also thought it looked terrifying I've never thought that it's a unique that whole thing
the Olenith or that whole thing always was thrilling to me I mean going up the whole way up from the bottom of the Jovers Road where it's on the way down to the Covent Coch and the visitor centre and go shooting up there in fact the electrician Faraday said
never again they were terrified of that landscape and I mean of course that would have been associated with the fact that yes there were bandits there because it was much easier to get your money off you up there than it was down in Dryadown
but there you go and so what I can tell you is that we can drive you know in the car from here down to Rairdown down to all of that and people always say have you been up there? And the answer is almost always yes
So when you say up there you mean the hill line that runs between Durnall and the Ellyn Valley?
Well certainly that but I mean everywhere else as well I mean all the way down the back road all the way down to coming down in where the reservoirs are from other directions you know coming down there and all that kind of thing
and we're a bit worried about and I mean obviously the Marteg and all of that I mean the Marteg is a fantastic thing I mean I hope it means since they managed to buy it for you know officially as a nature reserve back I don't think they'd get it any more today would they?
No I don't know
Well the thing is they did get it but not because they won the battle but because the people who did win it thought oh my god what have we done and offered it on to them after the sale how close was that?
I didn't know that
Oh yeah blimey oh god and it is all wonderful and all the way back to here from there on that side and on the other side and everything else you know it's fantastic
So this is the Gullwach nature reserve?
Yes, yes which is only a walk anyway you know to do all of that and in fact Henry the whoever it was the third probably who set up the assertions with Stratoflorida described the portion of land as that between the Elan and the Durnall
Which is quite a statement it involves everything you think you can see you know the Cormist with or whatever it is that joins up and then goes around the hill I mean people like Becky have done all that Stratoflorida to have you come here as a run
Which I know her about to do so I mean she's really the queen of all that stuff and has trashed her ankles slightly on but that's because she ran, ran it
Madness
Oh dear but you know it's all and all that the whole thing goes all the way to the Northall by coming over the top the other way and what we are particularly in Durnall we're thinking nobody ever comes here they're all queuing to get up Snowdon as hell
You know a lot of them are queuing to get up Cadiridris and there are a couple of other names then it's your Brecon's and then after that you're done nobody's doing it at all and we're sitting rather unnervously gloating thinking but do we want them to
Because people come up and down they do the Wye Valley walk and we wave a bit you know but it and there's obviously the Sustrans cycle route and people come but you know pass on their bikes to do all of that and I mean you know I don't know personally I'm quite happy to see all of that
It's partly because it is so marginal and people don't come because it hasn't got a sexy name or an easy M something or other access route you know and in this nobody's going to change that really but it would be nice to open it up a bit because we know it'll only be people
And I'm quite wrong about this we met somebody at Marte one time who lived their whole lives in Essex or somewhere but as a family separately they had each always come not just to Wales but to here and in particular to Marte to do that and to do that and they've done that every year for about as almost as old as we were when we met them
And so they got back here before we did before they were going to do their next walk and that's the only people ever discovered for whom that is true but it was it was quite a lovely moment to get all that because all of that I mean that is all it's all massively historical as well
That thing just where you know you're going pretty much well yeah as it goes down to from from the lane that goes right right right the way through does cut down to the and up against the foul up to the left there is all ancient settlements and of a really quite interesting nature because there's
There's a there's a there's a there's a track on there which is only on the 1813 ordinance survey map and not on the subsequent ones and it must surely be something to do with one of these looking for lead or whatever and deciding there probably wasn't any and jacking in
I just well that so you know we find all that whole aspect of it
Pretty fascinating as well
But it sounds like James it's a fine line really to keep the Durnall Valley quiet and pretty for ourselves and the people that live there versus promoting access along the Y Valley way cycle route walking route
And I'm going to bring it to a close now yeah thank you so much for your time today really very much appreciate it
Well if we can you know if we can do anything to make anything more you know of interest let's do it because I mean why wouldn't you I mean it's it's well I don't think there are any walls
But you know hearing his history and the love of the area from something like yourself is fascinating
And you know we've got photographs of stuff you can compare with things which are quite difficult to do and and and to
Well just to make the effort why they didn't turn the railway that goes on down to build and back into a walkway again I don't know well money something else got it
I'm sure it's all been to it but that that walk it nearly is
I don't do anything very much a no-brainer you know it's just as far as we've been we haven't been down as far as Newtown even we've only gone a little bit further than the bridge where you know the Ellen comes across and joins the Wyand as that foot bridge
And then there's the other stone bridge where which they've sort of let go of it to rot and they've bunged it up so you can't go over it you know it's it's and then all the way over the top to the Northland down to a timid and and and Joggerland
And there's the only crystal sort of many a thing but that's on that that's on the side as well and of course Clare when this friend of mine who has the family from Raglan
They had they took a lease on Tignorce the little cottage above Llewyd of Caer just as you're going around towards well the unfinished you know the unfinished down there and put the footings in and then you look up the farthest little white cottage
And then they took a lease on that for the whole of the wartime period and they were there when when all that whole valley and and the Clarewood Dam they used to walk the strata flora up that stream not over the hills and round because they hadn't built the dam in the 50s wherever it was
You know and so he had he had that experience of all of that and so I was just the whole thing's just too thrilling I just want to know about all of it and as Noel will tell you that is the part where the equivalent of Dick Serpin but the Welsh one operated
Except he said to be fair he did he did steal from the rich but I don't think he got around to doing much of the poor
Well thank you very much for your time today
Not at all not at all
I really appreciate it and perhaps you know if you've got the energy you could talk for a very long time
Yes